# ex2_27

Which of the following initializations are legal? Explain why.

```c++
(a) int i = -1, &r = 0;         (b) int *const p2 = &i2;
(c) const int i = -1, &r = 0;   (d) const int *const p3 = &i2;
(e) const int *p1 = &i2;        (f) const int &const r2;
(g) const int i2 = i, &r = i;
```

## Solution

(a) `int i = -1, &r = 0;`

**This is not legal.** `&r` is a non-`const` reference to an `int`, but it is being initialized to an integer. Because a non-`const` reference implies that the underlying object may be modified--and you can't modify a literal--this code will fail.

```c++
error: invalid initialization of non-const reference of type 'int&' from an rvalue of type 'int'
     int i = -1, &r = 0;
                      ^
```

(b) `int *const p2 = &i2;`

**This is not legal.** `i2` is a `const int`, which means that `p2` must be a pointer to a `const int` to ensure that we do not try to change the value of `i2` using the pointer.

```c++
error: invalid conversion from 'const int*' to 'int*' [-fpermissive]
     int *const p2 = &i2;
                     ^~~
```

(c) `const int i = -1, &r = 0;`

**This is legal.** `r` is a reference to a `const int`, or a "`const` reference". This means that the underlying object can not be changed by the reference. `r` is a `const` reference, so we can assign a literal to it because we will never be able to try to change it.

(d) `const int *const p3 = &i2;`

**This is legal.** `i2` is a `const int` and `p3` is a pointer to a `const int`. This ensures that we can not change `i2` via `*p3`.

We _cannot_ change the value of `p3` (ie. the memory address that `p3` points to).

(e) `const int *p1 = &i2;`

**This is legal.** `i2` is a `const int` and `p3` is a pointer to a `const int`. This ensures that we can not change `i2` via `*p3`.

(f) `const int &const r2;`

**This is not legal.** Declaring a constant reference (`&const`) is redundant because references can not be rebound to other objects. It's pretty much repeating what is already true, so this expression is not legal.

In addition, because `r2` is a reference to a `const int`, `r2` must be initialized to some value. We will not be able to change it later, essentially making it useless. The compiler prevents us from doing this.

```c++
error: 'const' qualifiers cannot be applied to 'const int&'
     const int &const r2;
                      ^~
error: 'r2' declared as reference but not initialized
```

(g) `const int i2 = i, &r = i;`

**This is legal.** Recall that `i` was defined by `int i = -1`. The value of `i` is copied into `i2`. `r` is a reference to a `const int` which is legal because even though the value of `i` may change at some point, all we care about is that we do not change it via `r`.
